Building a Job Board Platform with Directus and SolidStart.js (#289)
directus-labs/guest-authoring: directus-job-board-platform/index.md

---
title: 'Building a Job Board Platform with Directus and SolidStart.js'
description: 'Learn how to build a job board portal with Directus and SolidStart.js. You'll learn how to register new users, login, and perform create, read, update, and delete operations (CRUD) on Directus.'
author:
  name: 'Ndoma Precious'
  avatar_file_name: './ndoma-precious.png'
---

> In this tutorial, you'll learn to build a job board portal using Directus and SolidStart.js. We'll cover user registration, login, and CRUD operations with Directus. You'll create a complete job board with listing, application, and management features for both jobs and applications. This guide will provide you with the skills to combine Directus's backend capabilities with SolidStart.js's reactive frontend, to build a job portal web application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll learn to build a job board portal using Directus and SolidStart.js. We'll cover user registration, login, and working with data in Directus. You'll create a complete job board with listing, application, and management features for both jobs and applications. This guide will provide you with the skills to combine Directus's backend capabilities with SolidStart.js's reactive frontend, to build a job portal web application.
```

## Before You Start
You will need:

> - [Node.js v18](https://nodejs.org/) and above installed on your computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Node.js v18](https://nodejs.org/) or above installed on your computer.
```

- A Directus project - follow our [quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart) if you don't already have one.
- Some experience with Typescript and SolidStart.js.

The code for this tutorial is available on this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/preshenv/directus-solidstart-job-board).

> ## Configuring Directus Data Collections
> You need to create a `job`, and `application` collections in your Directus Data Model (**Settings > Data Model**). The `job` will store a list available jobs with the following fields:
> 
> - `id`: Autocomplete Input
> - `title`: input field;
> - `location`: input field
> - `type`: input field
> - `salary`: input field
> 
> Then `application` collection will store job applications with the following fields:
> 
> - `id:` Autocomplete Input
> - `status`: input field
> 
> ## Creating relationships in Directus
> 
> To link a new job with its creator:
> 
> 1. In the `job` collection, add a Many-to-One field named `employer`.
> 2. Set the related collection to System > `directus_users`.
> 3. Choose `first_name` as the Display template.
> 
> This creates a relationship between the job and the admin who created it.
> 
> In the `application` collection, add two Many-to-One fields:
> 
> 1. `user`: Links to the applicant
> 2. `job`: Links to the job
> 
> These fields connect each application to its corresponding applicant and job. Add 3 items in the `job` collection - [here's some sample data](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/preshenv/directus-solidstart-job-board/main/src/components/jobs.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring Directus Data Models

Create a `job`, and `application` collection in your project. The `job` will store a list available jobs with the following fields:

- `id`: autocomplete input
- `title`: input field
- `location`: input field
- `type`: input field
- `salary`: input field

The `application` collection will store job applications with the following fields:

- `id:` Autocomplete Input
- `status`: input field

To link a new job with its creator:

1. In the `job` collection, add a Many-to-One field named `employer`.
2. Set the related collection to System > `directus_users`.
3. Choose `first_name` as the Display template.

This creates a relationship between the job and the admin who created it.

In the `application` collection, add two Many-to-One fields:

1. `user`: Links to the applicant
2. `job`: Links to the job

These fields connect each application to its corresponding applicant and job. Add 3 items in the `job` collection - [here's some sample data](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/preshenv/directus-solidstart-job-board/main/src/components/jobs.md).
```

## Creating a New User Role
In your access control settings, create a new role called `Job Applicant`. For the `application` collection, enable `create` and `read` permissions. Use custom rules for the `application` collection to ensure users can only read and update their own applications. Set a filter like: `user -> id Equals $CURRENT_USER.id`. This allows users to view all jobs, create new applications, and view or update only their own applications. 

## Allowing Public Registration
Open the public role, find `directus_users` under system collections, and then open custom permissions for the `create` operation. 
1. In field permissions, enable only `first_name`, `last_name`, `email`, and `password` options. If you want users to provide other data at the time of registration, enable the respective field.
2. In field validation, require `first_name`, `last_name`, `email`, and `password` to not be empty.
3. In field presets, set the new user's `role` to the `Job Applicant` role id. 

> Give public view access to the `job` collection to allow users to see available jobs even when they are not logged in. Also, ensure the admin role retains full permissions across all collections.

Reviewer: Please rework this section to use our new user registration endpoint. It must first be enabled in project settings, and then an unauthenticated request can be made to POST /users/register: https://docs.directus.io/reference/authentication.html#register

Author: resolved

> ## Initializing the SolidStart.js project
> Create a new SolidStart project by running the command:
> 
> ```env
>  npm init solid@latest
> ```
> Choose the **bare** template, enable Server-side rendering from the prompt, and Typescript in the prompts.
> 
> ## Setting up Directus instance
> In your SolidStart project's `src` directory, create a `lib` directory. Inside it, create a `directus.js` file:
> 
> ```jsx
> import { authentication, createDirectus, rest } from "@directus/sdk";
> 
> export const PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL = import.meta.env
>   .VITE_PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL;
> 
> function getDirectusInstance() {
>   const directus = createDirectus(PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL)
>     .with(
>       authentication("cookie", { credentials: "include", autoRefresh: true })
>     )
>     .with(rest({ credentials: "include" }));
>   return directus;
> }
> export default getDirectusInstance;
> ```
> Add your Directus URL to the `.env` file:
> 
> ```env
> VITE_PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL='https://directus.example.com'
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Initializing a SolidStart.js project

Create a new SolidStart project by running the command:

```env
npm init solid@latest
```

Choose the **bare** template, enable Server-side rendering from the prompt, and Typescript in the prompts.

In your SolidStart project's `src` directory, create a `lib` directory. Inside it, create a `directus.js` file:

```jsx
import { authentication, createDirectus, rest } from "@directus/sdk";

export const PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL = import.meta.env
  .VITE_PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL;

function getDirectusInstance() {
  const directus = createDirectus(PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL)
    .with(
      authentication("cookie", { credentials: "include", autoRefresh: true })
    )
    .with(rest({ credentials: "include" }));
  return directus;
}
export default getDirectusInstance;
```

Add your Directus URL to the `.env` file:

```env
VITE_PUBLIC_DIRECTUS_API_URL='https://directus.example.com'
```
````

Consolidating as it's all part of setup

## Implementing User Authentication

> To implement user authentication to grant users access to the application, create a **context**, and inside that folder create an `AuthContext.tsx` file and add the following code:

Reviewer: > create a **context**

A context... directory?

Reviewer: This whole section needs subheadings focusing on each part of the authentication - register, login, fetching the user, logout, etc. This is too much all at once - break it down for comprehension.

Author: resolved

        required
      />
      <input
        type="password"
        placeholder="Password"
        value={password()}
        onInput={(e) => setPassword(e.currentTarget.value)}
        required
      />
      <button type="submit">Login</button>
    </form>
  );
}
```
## Adding Navigation
SolidStart uses a file-based routing system, so all the files in your `src/routes` directory are automatically routes. To set up navigation:

1. Use the `<FileRoutes />` component from SolidStart.
2. Wrap it with `<Router>`from `@solidjs/router`.
3. Enclose everything in `<AuthProvider>` for app-wide authentication context.

Your App component should look like this:
```jsx
import { Router } from "@solidjs/router";
import { AuthProvider } from "./context/AuthContext";
import { Suspense } from "solid-js";
import { FileRoutes } from "@solidjs/start/router";

export default function App() {
  return (
    <AuthProvider>
      <Router root={props => <Suspense>{props.children}</Suspense>}>
        <FileRoutes />
      </Router>
    </AuthProvider>
  );
}
```
This setup enables automatic routing based on your file structure while providing authentication context throughout the app.

> ## Creating components for displaying job listings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating Job Listings Components
```

      return fetchedJobs as Jobs;
    } catch (error) {
      console.error("Error fetching jobs:", error);
    }
  };

  const [jobs, { refetch: refetchJobs }] = createResource(fetchJobs);

  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Job Management System</h1>
      <Show
        when={auth.user()}
        fallback={
          <nav>
            <button onClick={() => navigate("/login")}>Login</button>
            <button onClick={() => navigate("/register")}>Register</button>
          </nav>
        }
      >
        <button onClick={auth.logout}>Logout</button>
        <Show when={auth.user()?.email === "admin@example.com"}>
          <button onClick={() => navigate("/applications")}>
            Manage Applications
          </button>
        </Show>
      </Show>
      <Show when={jobs.loading}>Loading jobs...</Show>
      <Show when={jobs.error}>Error loading jobs: {jobs.error}</Show>
    <Show
        when={!jobs.error}
        fallback={<div>Error loading jobs: {jobs.error?.message}</div>}
      >
        <JobList
          jobs={jobs() || []}
        />
      </Show>
    </div>
  );
}

export default HomePage;
```
![Job Listing Portal](<Screenshot 2024-07-02 at 10.43.05.png>)

> ## Creating, updating, and deleting job listings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating, Updating, and Deleting Listings
```

Please also break this down into i's constituent parts. It's too much to do at the same time.

        required
      />
      <button type="submit">{props.job ? "Update Job" : "Add Job"}</button>
    </form>
  );
}
```
Then add the following code in your `components/Modal.tsx` file.

```jsx
import { Show, JSX } from "solid-js";
import "./Modal.css";

interface ModalProps {
  isOpen: boolean;
  onClose: () => void;
  children: JSX.Element;
}

export default function Modal(props: ModalProps) {
  return (
    <Show when={props.isOpen}>
      <div class="modal-overlay" onClick={props.onClose}>
        <div class="modal-content" onClick={(e) => e.stopPropagation()}>
          <button class="modal-close" onClick={props.onClose}>×</button>
          {props.children}
        </div>
      </div>
    </Show>
  );
}
```
Create a new file named `Modal.css` in your **components** and copy the CSS styles [here](https://github.com/preshenv/directus-solidstart-job-board/blob/main/src/components/Modal.css)to it.

Log in with admin credentials, and click on the **Add New Job** button to create a new job, you can also edit and delete a job by clicking on the edit and delete buttons respectively

![Add new job modal](<Screenshot 2024-07-02 at 12.01.27.png>)

> ## Implementing search and filtering functionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Implementing Search and Filters
```
